[[PageOutline]]

= split package proposal =

This is a proposal for the [http://hackage.haskell.org/package/split split package] to be included in the next major release of the Haskell platform.

Everyone is invited to review this proposal, following the [http://trac.haskell.org/haskell-platform/wiki/AddingPackages standard procedure for proposing and reviewing packages].

Review comments should be sent to the libraries mailing list by September 4.

= Credits =

Proposal author and package maintainer: Brent Yorgey <byorgey at cis.upenn.edu>

= Abstract =

The Data.List.Split module contains a wide range of strategies for splitting lists with respect to some sort of delimiter, mostly implemented through a unified combinator interface. The goal is to be a flexible yet simple alternative to the standard 'split' function found in some other mainstream languages.

Documentation and tarball from the hackage page:

  http://hackage.haskell.org/package/split

Development repo:

  darcs get http://hub.darcs.net/byorgey/split

= Rationale =

Splitting a list into chunks based on some sort of delimiter(s) is a
common need, and is provided in the standard libraries of several
mainstream languages (e.g. [http://docs.python.org/py3k/library/stdtypes.html?highlight=split#str.split Python], [http://www.ruby-doc.org/core-1.9.3/String.html#method-i-split Ruby], [http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/lang/String.html#split(java.lang.String) Java]).  Haskell beginners routinely ask whether such a function exists in the standard libraries.  For a long time, the answer was no.  Adding such a function to Haskell's standard libraries has been proposed multiple times over the years, but consensus was never reached on the design of such a function. (See, e.g. [http://www.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2006-July/005504.html], [http://www.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2006-October/006072.html], and [http://www.haskell.org/pipermail/libraries/2008-January/008922.html].)

In December 2008 the [http://hackage.haskell.org/package/split split package] was released, implementing not just a single split method, but a wide range of splitting strategies.

Since then the split package has gained wide acceptance, with [http://packdeps.haskellers.com/reverse/split almost 95 reverse dependencies], putting it in the top 40 for number of reverse dependencies on Hackage.

The package is quite stable. Since the 0.1.4 release in April 2011 only very minor updates have been made.  It has a large [http://code.haskell.org/~byorgey/code/split/Properties.hs suite of QuickCheck properties]; to my recollection no bugs have ever been reported.

= API =

For a detailed description of the package API and example usage, see [http://hackage.haskell.org/packages/archive/split/0.2.0.0/doc/html/Data-List-Split.html the Haddock documentation].

= Design decisions =

Most of the library is based around a (rather simple) combinator
interface.  Combinators are used to build up configuration records
(recording options such as whether to keep delimiters, whether to keep
blank segments, etc).  A configuration record is finally handed off to
a function which performs a generic maximally-information-preserving
splitting algorithm and then does various postprocessing steps (based
on the configuration) to selectively throw information away.  It is
probably not the fastest way to implement these methods, but speed is
explicitly not a design goal: the aim is to provide a reasonably wide
range of splitting strategies which can be used simply.  Blazing speed
(or more complex processing), when needed, can be obtained from a
proper parsing package.

= Discussion =

Initial discussion of the proposal can be [http://thread.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17649/ found here].

= Resolved issues =

I have made some changes to the package as a result of discussion,
explained below.  The changes can be seen in the
[http://code.haskell.org/~byorgey/code/split darcs repository]; a new
version of the package has not yet been released.

== Use of GADTs/ExistentialQuantification ==

Henning Thielemann [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17650 asked] whether the GADTs extension is really necessary.  Twan van Laarhoven [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17659 suggested] a way around it.  I have adopted a variant of Twan's proposal, and the package is now fully Haskell 2010 compliant.

== Synonyms ==

[http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17653 Roman Cheplyaka] and others expressed distaste at the presence of synonyms for several functions in the library, arguing that it unnecessarily complicates the API and makes it harder to read others' code.

Following a [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17669 suggestion from Simon Hengel], I have adopted the solution of

 * marking the synonyms as deprecated;
 * passing the "prune" option to haddock so they are not documented as part of the API.

This effectively does away with any confusion the synonyms may cause,
WITHOUT breaking any existing code, since the synonyms are still
exported.  Note, however, that I do plan to bump the major version number, as [http://www.haskell.org/haskellwiki/Package_versioning_policy#Deprecation recommended by the package versioning policy].

== Consistency with existing names ==

Bryan O'Sullivan [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17675 pointed out] that the text package has an existing function, essentially identical in functionality to splitEvery, called chunksOf.  In the interest of consistency with an existing HP package, I have renamed splitEvery to chunksOf (and deprecated and pruned splitEvery, just like the other synonyms as explained above).

== Use of GHC.Exts ==

At the request of a user, the 0.1.4.3 release switched from defining its own version of the standard 'build' function, to importing it from GHC.Exts.  This allows GHC to do more optimization, resulting in reported speedups to uses of splitEvery, splitPlaces, and splitPlacesBlanks.  However, this makes the library GHC-specific.  I outlined the options [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17759 in a message to the libraries mailing list].  Several suggestions were made, including this [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17650 suggestion by Henning Thielemann]:

  You could provide two private modules with the same name in
  different directories, one that re-exports 'build' from GHC.Exts and
  one with a custom definition of 'build' for non-GHC compilers. Then
  set 'Hs-Source-Dirs' in Cabal according to the impl(ghc). No CPP
  needed, only Cabal. One could even think of a separate package for
  this purpose.

This looks like it could work, but it adds a lot of complication for not much benefit.

In the end, in the interest of simplicity and full Haskell2010 compliance, I simply went back to defining build manually. [http://article.gmane.org/gmane.comp.lang.haskell.libraries/17760 Henning also suggested] that there ought to be a package providing 'build' in a generic way, so that you get the right version depending which compiler you are using.  If this ever happens I would be happy to depend on that package.

= Open issues =

== Missing strategies ==

The specific way that the generic splitting algorithm is implemented
does preclude some imaginable splitting strategies.  For example, a
few years ago I tried adding a strategy that used a predicate on pairs
of elements, splitting down the middle of any pairs that satisfy the
predicate, but gave up because it simply did not fit.
